# CH 1 Group Theory
## 1.1 Definition
### Binary Operation
A binary operation on a set $S$ is a function $f: S\times S\rightarrow S$.
- For simplicity, denote $f(a,b)= a * b$

### Semi-group
A `semi-group` is a set $S$ `together with a binary operation` $*$ on $S$ such that the following axioms hold:
1. (Implicit) Closure: $\forall a,b\in S$, $a*b\in S$
2. Associativity: $\forall a,b,c\in S$, $(a*b)*c = a*(b*c)$

> $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$, the set of all invertible $n\times n$ matrices with real entries, is a semi-group under matrix multiplication. But not a binary operation under matrix addition.
>
> $GL$ is called the general linear group. $SL$ is called the special linear group. 

### Monoid
The `identity element` for a semi-group $S$ is an element $e\in S$ such that $\forall a\in S$, $a*e = e*a = a$.
- Not all semi-groups have an identity element.

A semi-group $S$ is a `monoid` if it has an `identity element`.
> $(\Z_n, +), (\Z_n, *)$ are monoids.
> - $+, *$ are `well-defined` binary operation on $\Z_n$, which is independent to the `choice of representatives`.

### Group
A monoid $S$ is a `group` if every element of $S$ has an `inverse`. That is, $\forall a\in S, \exists b\in S$ such that $a*b = b*a = e$.
- Inverse is unique.
- $(a^{-1})^{-1} = a$
- $(a*b)^{-1} = b^{-1}*a^{-1}$

A `group` is a `set` $G$ `together with a binary operation` $*$ on $G$ such that the following axioms hold:
1. (Implicit) Closure: For all $a,b\in G$, $a*b\in G$
2. Associativity: For all $a,b,c\in G$, $(a*b)*c = a*(b*c)$
3. Identity: There exists an element $e\in G$ such that for all $a\in G$, $a*e = e*a = a$
4. Inverse: For each $a\in G$, there exists an element $b\in G$ such that $a*b = b*a = e$

> $\Z_n^* = \{a\in \Z_n: \gcd(a,n) = 1\}$ is a group under multiplication modulo $n$.
> - Bezout's identity: $ax + ny = 1$
>
> $\Sigma(A)=\{f: A\rightarrow A\}$ is a monoid but not a group. $S(a)=\{f: A\rightarrow A | f \text{ is a bijection}\}$ is a group under composition.
>
> In particular, if $S$ is a finite set with $n$ elements, then symmetric group (Note maybe wrong)

## 1.2 Subgroup
A subset $H$ of a group $G$ is a `subgroup` of $G$ if $H$ is a group under the same binary operation as $G$. Denote as $H\leq G$.
- $e_H = e_G$
- $H \leq G$ iff $\forall a,b \in G$, $a*b\in H$ and $a^{-1}\in H$.
- $H \leq G$ iff $\forall a,b\in H$, $a*b^{-1}\in H$.
- If $G$ is finite, $H \leq G$ iff $\forall a,b\in H$, $a*b\in H$.


## 1.3 Abelian Group
A group $G$ is `abelian` if $G$ is commutative. That is, $\forall a,b\in G$, $a*b = b*a$.

# Cosets and Lagrange's Theorem
## 2.1 Cosets
Let $H \leq G$. Define a relation $\sim$ on $G$ by $a\sim b$ iff 
$$a^{-1}b\in H$$
$\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $G$.

Denote $[g] = \{x\in G: x\sim g\} = \{x\in G: g^{-1}x \in H\} = \{x\in G: x\in gH\}$.

$[g]$ is called the `left coset` of $H$ containing $g$.

Similarly, $[g] = \{x\in G: x\sim g\} = \{x\in G: xg^{-1} \in H\} = \{x\in G: x\in Hg\}$ is called the `right coset` of $H$ containing $g$.

### Index
> **Lemma** 
> The number of left cosets is equal that of right cosets.
>
> Proof: Construct a bijection. First prove it's `well-defined` and injective then prove surjective.

The number of `cosets` of $H$ in $G$ is called the `index` of $H$ in $G$, denoted as $[G:H]$.

## Lagrange's Theorem
Let $G$ be a group(finite or infinite) and $H\leq G$. Then
$$|G| = |H| \cdot [G:H]$$

Proof:

- Let $R\subset G$ such that $\{gH\}_{g\in R}$ is distinct. So $|R| = [G:H]$
- Bijection $R \times H \rightarrow G$, $(g,h) \mapsto gh$

### Corollary
If $|G| <\infty$, $|H| \mid |G|$, divisible

## Order of an Element
Let $G$ be a group and $a\in G$. The `order` of $a$ is the smallest **positive** integer $n$ such that $a^n = e$.

If no such $n$ exists, then $a$ has `infinite order`.

# CH 3 - Cyclic Groups
## Homomorphism
Let $G$ and $H$ be groups. A function $f: G\rightarrow H$ is a `homomorphism` if for all $a,b\in G$, 
$$f(ab) = f(a)f(b)$$

> $GL_n(\R) \rightarrow \R^*$, $A\mapsto \det(A)$ is a homomorphism.

## Isomorphism
A homomorphism $f: G\rightarrow H$ is an `isomorphism` if $f$ is a bijection. Denote $G\cong H$.

### Remark
If $G$ and $H$ are isomorphic to each other, we identify $G$ and $H$ when we talk about group structure
- For other properties, it's a different story.

## Cyclic Group
Let $G$ be a group and $a\in G$. The `cyclic subgroup` generated by $a$ is the set
$$G = \langle a\rangle = \{a^n: n\in \Z\}$$
$a$ is called a `generator` of $G$.

> A cyclic group is isomorphic to either $\Z$ or $\Z_n$ for some $n$.
> - They are the only two cyclic groups

## Subgroup
A subgroup $H$ of a cyclic group $G$ is also cyclic.

# CH 4 - Normal Subgroups and Quotient Groups
> Recap:
> $$ \Z_n = \{\bar 0, \bar 1, \ldots, \overline{n-1}\}$$
> $$\bar i + \bar j = \overline{i+j}$$
> Can we generalize this?

> Consider $H \leq G$, 
> $$G = \bigcup_{g\in G} Hg = \bigcup_{g\in G} gH$$
>
> Want: Define an operator such that $(aH)(bH) = (ab)H$
> - well-defined?
> - necessary condition: 
>   $$(ab)H = (a'b')H, a'\in aH, b'\in bH$$
>   $$(ab)H = (ahb)H$$
>   $$ b^{-1}Hb \subset H$$
> - sufficient? Yes!

- $b^{-1} Hb \subset H \forall b \Leftrightarrow b^{-1}Hb = H$

## Normal Subgroup
A subgroup $H$ of a group $G$ is `normal` if $Hb = bH$ for all $b\in G$. Denote $H\triangleleft G$. Or equivalently:
- $gHg^{-1} = H$
- $gHg^{-1} \subset H$

> Also, the following proposistions are equivalent for $H \leq G$
> - $H \triangleleft G$
> - every left coset is a right coset
>
> $$g = ge = hg',\qquad Hg = H(hg') = Hg'$$

## Quotient Group
If $G \triangleleft G$, then the set of left cosets of $H$ in $G$ is a group under the operation 
$$(aH)(bH) = (ab)H$$
This group is called the `quotient group` of $G$ by $H$, denoted as $G/H$.

## Conjucacy
Let $G$ be a group and $A,B \subset G$. We say that $A$ and $B$ are `conjugate` if $\exist g\in G$ such that $B = gAg^{-1}$.

Let $G$ be a group, two elements $a,b\in G$ are `conjugate` if $\exists g\in G$ such that $b = gag^{-1}$.
- Conjugacy is an equivalence relation on $G$.

> For a set $S$, we denote the $2^S$ as the power set of $S$.
> $$2^S = \{A: A\subset S\}$$

## Normalizer
Let $G$ be a group and $A\subset G$. The `normalizer` of $A$ in $G$ is the set
$$N_G(A) = \{g\in G: gAg^{-1} = A\}$$
- $H \triangleleft G \Leftrightarrow N_G(H) = G$

## Centralizer
Let $G$ be a group and $A\subset G$. The `centralizer` of $A$ in $G$ is the set
$$C_G(A) = \{g\in G: gag^{-1} = a, \forall a\in A\}$$
- $C_G \subset N_G$, $C_G(A) \triangleleft N_G(A)$

The `center` of $G$ is the set $C_G(G)$.
$$C_G(G) = \{g\in G: gag^{-1} = a, \forall a\in G\}$$
- iff $G$ is abelian
- $Z(G) \triangleleft G$

> For $|G| =4$, $G$ is isomorphic to either $\Z_4$ or $\Z_2 \times \Z_2$. Both of wich are abelian, and the latter is called the `Klein four-group`

# 5 - Direct Products
## External Direct Product
Let $A_1, A_2,\ldots, A_n$ be sets. The `external direct product` of $A_1, A_2,\ldots, A_n$ is
$$A_1 \times A_2 \times \ldots \times A_n = \{(a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n): a_i \in A_i\}$$

For groups $G_1, G_2, \ldots, G_n$, further define the binary operation as
$$(a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n)(b_1, b_2, \ldots, b_n) = (a_1b_1, a_2b_2, \ldots, a_nb_n)$$
Then $G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n$ is also a group.

> Let $H_i = \{(e_1, e_2, \ldots, e_{i-1}, g_i, e_{i+1}, \ldots, e_n): g_i \in G_i\}$.
> - $H_i \triangleleft (G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n)$
> - $(G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n) = H_1H_2\ldots H_n$
> - Every element can be uniquely written as $h_1h_2\ldots h_n$ where $h_i \in H_i$.
## Internal Direct Product
Let $G$ be a group and $H_1, H_2, \ldots, H_n$ be subgroups of $G$. We say that $G$ is the `internal direct product` of $H_1, H_2, \ldots, H_n$ if 
- $H_i \triangleleft G$
- $G = H_1H_2\ldots H_n$
- If $h_1h2\cdots h_n = h_1'h_2'\cdots h_n'$, then $h_i = h_i'$ for all $i$.

> $$G\cong H_1 \times H_2 \times \ldots \times H_n$$
> $$\pi: \begin{array}{ll}
> H_1 \times H_2 \times \ldots \times H_n & \rightarrow G \\
>    (h_1, h_2, \ldots, h_n) & \mapsto h_1h_2\ldots h_n
> \end{array}
> $$
> - $ab = b'a = ba' =  ba$ for all $a\in H_i, b\in H_j$, $i\neq j$ (Unique representation)

For a group $G$ and two normal subgroups $H, K \triangleleft G$ with $HK = G$, $G$ is the internal direct product of $H$ and $K$ iff $H\cap K = \{e\}$.

# Isomorphism Theorems
## First Isomorphism Theorem
Given $G$, $H$ as two distinct groups. Let $f: G\rightarrow H$ be a homomorphism. Then
1. $\ker f \triangleleft G$
2. $\operatorname{Im} f \leq H$
3. $G/\ker f \cong \operatorname{Im} f$


## Second Isomorphism Theorem
Let $G$ be a group. $H \leq G$, $N \triangleleft G$. Then
1. $HN = NH\leq G$
   > $\bigcup_{h\in H} hN = \bigcup_{h\in H} Nh$
   >
   > $AB \leq G \Longleftrightarrow AB = BA$, consider $(ab)^{-1}a'b'$
2. $H\cap N \triangleleft H$
   > Not straightforward. 
   > $$h H\cap N h^{-1}\subset hHh^{-1},hH\cap Nh^{-1}\subset h Nh^{-1}\subset H$$
3. $H / (H\cap N) \cong HN/N$
   > Let $f: H \rightarrow HN/N$, $h \mapsto hN$
4. $N \triangleleft HN$

   because $HN \leq G$.
   > If $M \triangleleft G$ and $M\leq H \leq G$, then $M \triangleleft H$



> $G = GL_n(\Reals)$, $H = GL_n(Q)$, $N = SL_n(\Reals)= \{A| \det A = 1\}$,
> $$HN/N = SL\cdot GL/SL \cong H/H\cap N = GL_n(Q)/SL_n(Q) \cong Q^*$$


## Third Isomorphism Theorem
Let $G$ be a group and $M,N \triangleleft G$ with $M \subset N$. Then
$$\frac{G/M}{N/M} \cong G/N$$

Proof
1. $N/M \subset G/M$
2. $f: G/M \rightarrow G/N$, $gM \mapsto gN$ with $\ker f = N/M \triangleleft G/M$

> $G = \Z$, $M = m\Z$, $N = n\Z, n\mid m$ $\Rightarrow$ $\frac{Z_m}{nZ/mZ} \cong Z_n$

## Fourth Isomorphism Theorem
Let $G$ be a group and $M \triangleleft G$. Then there is a bijection between the set of subgroups of $G$ containing $M$($\{A \leq G: M \subset A\}$) and the set of subgroups of $G/M$.

Moreover, $A \triangleleft G$ iff $A/M \triangleleft G/M$ 
<!-- and in this case, $(G/M)/(A/M) \cong G/A$. -->

> Find all subgroups of $\Z_{18} = \Z/18\Z$
> $$A = \{\Z, 2\Z, 3\Z, 6\Z, 9\Z, 18\Z\}$$
>
> subgroups are $A_i/18\Z$

# Permutation Groups
Let $\Sigma$ be a set. A `permutation` of $\Sigma$ is a bijection $f: \Sigma \rightarrow \Sigma$.

The set of all permutations of $\Sigma$ is denoted as $S(\Sigma)$.

A subgroup $G$ of $S(\Sigma)$ is called a `permutation group` on $\Sigma$.

In particular, if $|\Sigma| < \infty$, then $S(\Sigma)$ is denoted as $S_n$. $S_n$ is called the `symmetric group` of order $n!$

For simplicity, we denote $\Sigma = \{1,2,\ldots, n\}$. A permutation $\sigma \in S_n$ is denoted by
$$\sigma = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & \ldots & n \\
\sigma(1) & \sigma(2) & \ldots & \sigma(n)
\end{pmatrix}$$

## Cycle Notation
A `cycle` of `length` $k$ is a permutation of the form 
$$(a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_k) = \begin{pmatrix}
a_1 & a_2 & \ldots & a_k \\
a_2 & a_3 & \ldots & a_1
\end{pmatrix}$$
$a_1 \mapsto a_2 \mapsto \ldots \mapsto a_k \mapsto a_1$

For any $j \notin \{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_k\}$, $(a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_k)(j) = j$

---

A cycle of length 2 is called a `transposition`. A cycle of length 1 is indentity, $(1) = (2)$

### Lemma
1. A cycle can be decomposed into a product of transpositions.
$$
(a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_k) = (a_1, a_k)(a_1, a_{k-1})\ldots(a_1, a_2)
$$
2. Every finite permutation can be written as a product of disjoint cycles.
3. Every finite permutation can be written as a product of transpositions.

### Theorem
The number of transpositions in a decomposition of a permutation $\sigma$ is invariant mod 2.

let $z = \prod_{1\leq i<j\leq n} (x_i -x_j)$, where $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$ are variables.

For any permutation $\sigma \in S_n$, define
$$\sigma(z) = \prod_{1\leq i<j \leq n}(x_{\sigma(1)} - x_{\sigma(j)})$$
- $\sigma \cdot \pi (z) = \sigma(\pi(z))$
- If $\sigma$ is a transposition, then $\sigma(z) = -z$

So if $\prod \tau_i = \prod \pi_i = \sigma$, $(-1)^r = (-1)^r$

A permutation is called `even` if it can be written as a product of an even number of transpositions. Otherwise, it is called `odd`.

## Alternating Group
The set of even permutations in $S_n$ is a `normsl subgroup` of $S_n$. Denote as $A_n$. It is called the `alternating group` of order $n!/2$. Furthermore, $[S_n:A_n] = 2$

